full okay well and then I shall start
somebody
asked a question on YouTube about
uh Sam Harris's latest episode
um now let me just find a question I
think it was just basically any thoughts
on
on that
um and I did listen to it when it came
out
and the first I don't want to say half
maybe the first sort of quarter of that
25 percent or so
I broadly couldn't agree with the more
they were
explaining how chat gbt works of course
they would be able to do that they're
experts in the field the the guests that
were there Stuart and Gary
and there was a debate between them and
the debate was quite good throughout the
entire episode I thought
audio's clipping okay
um
how about now is that any better
hmm
all right that's a problem
ah okay
yeah
um so there's some disagreement about
whether the audio is working or not
if other people start okay good yes um
maybe it's just a streaming issue
um yeah and so the first
sort of quarter of this episode
on making sense with Sam Harris titled
the trouble with AI I'm just looking at
it now then
being Experts of course they were able
to explain how the current crop of AI
stuff works and
I've been investigating this recently
diving into some of the papers and I
agreed with them about their explanation
for how it works
why should there be any dispute about
this because with complex systems like
this the remarkable thing is that
sometimes
the programmers themselves don't know
how the system achieves the
functionality that it does this has to
be one of the first times in the human
history of invention
that this is a really significant
problem we've built a thing that we
don't know how it works it's as if we
were to build an aircraft and not know
how it flies just that it does
of course prior to good explanations it
was routine for people to have medicines
you know native medicines medicines they
got out for us and didn't understand
how they worked they didn't understand
the mechanism of action
and so now we've built these systems and
they're very poor explanations on the
internet
I've been trying to work through not
only the papers for things like the
transformer paper
and various other kinds of AI papers
that have been produced recently but
also explainer videos by experts on how
these things work and there is some
disagreement sometimes
and sometimes people just say they don't
know how it works but famously the
alphago program the programs themselves
said we don't know how it's doing what
it's doing you know broad ideas but not
exactly an understanding not a good
explanation we might say of these
systems are achieving the functionality
that they do and so
anyway in the Sam Harris episode they
agreed on that and so I was you know
buoyed by the fact that ah okay we have
people here who are being sensible
they're not jumping ahead and saying we
understand how this thing works and it's
all going to end in a health scope you
know eventually those sort of remarks
came but
they were at least grounded in something
like a sober admission that people
didn't really understand precisely how
chat gbt was achieving what it was doing
we understand the broader idea
the broad idea is that you just have a
vast amount of data and it is trained on
this data via a process called forward
and back propagation and out of that the
chat GPT system can extract
what the pre-existing knowledge is but
it never creates new knowledge okay
that's always my interest is are these
systems creating new knowledge or are
they just extracting out what is already
there
this is this was true by the way of the
alphago way of programming and why it
was different to previous
ways of trying to win at certain games
the chess Bots for example chess
computers
were simply simply calculating a tree of
millions of possible different moves
that could be made in figuring out what
is the best move out of those millions
of moves the alphago approach was
different it was to look at
thousands of games actual games that
have been played
and then to
find patterns in the strategies that
were being used by the winning players
and then to use those to win against
itself and then it would play against
itself and find patterns as to what
would beat the best players what
strategies would beat the best players
what patterns are there and how to win
rather than looking thousands of moves
ahead now the latest chess engines are
also doing this they're also not only
looking millions of moves ahead but also
looking at past chess games
how is this different to what people do
by the way how is it different to how
people learn
people generally although chess
Grandmasters and even you know not so
Grand Masters chess Grandmaster will
look at previous games to learn
something about how to play a good game
of chairs
this is not how people learn anything or
chess for example they don't need to be
shown thousands of games in order to
understand the rules they need to be
shown a limited number they're using
guess and check conjection refutation
and
so chat GPT is not doing that that's not
the way in which it learns to have a
conversation how does it learn to have a
conversation it is given almost the
entire Corpus of human knowledge as it
exists now well not actually because we
know that GPT 4 that's supposed to be
coming out this week Thursday or
something
it is going to be given an even larger
the number of uh
uh a larger amount of data a much
greater repertoire of data orders of
magnitude
but still it is pre-existing knowledge
this is not how people learn and because
it's not how people learn we shouldn't
expect it
to be generating new knowledge to be
learning new stuff that's not already in
the database to come up with new
explanations it can give you the
pre-existing explanations but until it's
able to give you a good new explanation
as David Deutsch himself tested chat GPT
on you know
um come up with a unification of
quantum theory successive Theory the
quantum interior and general relativity
and it was a disappointing result it
couldn't do that
okay
then we know that we're not in the
presence of something that is
uh intelligent in the way that we should
regard things as being intelligent
and what I regard as intelligent what
that word means is can you generate can
you conjecture new explanations good
explanations so uh that that that is
what I think about the the difference
between
the way in which people learn and the
way in which these Advanced Bots are
learning the advanced AI is learning
okay we're not seeing anything like what
uh uh people do so we don't have any
clue about AGI there's no sense in which
we're closer to AGI we'll know we're
closer to ADI when we understand what it
is that people do what is that human
beings do once we understand what human
beings do then we'll be able to program
that in
silicon or whatever
okay that's that
um so I did write a couple of notes just
as I was thinking about coming on here
um to do with the Sam Harris stuff
uh so I said I had a good probabilistic
programming
and then
then it became authoritarian then we had
all three
as I I suppose I should have expected
converging on how it is that
the rest of the audience more or less
aren't particularly bright people or
perhaps the rest of Sam's audience is is
bright but in general people aren't very
bright and so they need to be
LED taught uh
not be treated as agents themselves who
are able to come up with their own
explanations not to have their
preferences aren't good preferences the
there is a group of wise people that
know better than they do that kind of
thing this came down to the idea of
alignment this whole big issue of how do
we get the artificially intelligence
systems to align with us it depends on
what you mean by alignment I've
interpreted alignment as being how do we
ensure how do we ensure that these
systems share the same morals as us
and there's a sense in which okay we
want Society other people in our society
to share the same kind of morals as us
okay
but if that is hard coded into a system
that's either enslavement on the one
hand okay because I can't change their
mind
or
it's a way of ensuring that the system
itself is not a general intelligence
because if it's hard-coded then it can't
possibly make any progress on those
models moral knowledge is like any other
sort of knowledge in that respect that
it can be improved and that we should
want to improve it and so we don't want
other human beings to be aligned in that
sense
why should we want AGI to be aligned in
that sense namely incapable of coming up
with a better idea in Morality
we don't want that kind of alignment
anyway all three of them of course Sam
and Stuart and Gary
agreed that these systems should be
aligned with us there was some a hint at
the end there where Sam said well you
know these systems if they're super
intelligent then
presumably they'd be also super
intelligent when it comes to morality
okay and I couldn't agree with him more
but it was a side issue yeah it's a
skipped over it and passing but that's
the central idea here I think that is
just crucially important to appreciate
that if these things are generally
intelligent like us
then they will have
the capacity to reason like us and to be
moral like us I don't endorse the idea
of super intelligence simply because
there's only one way of creating
knowledge
guessing and checking
and
if we get to a point where a system is
able to guess and check in a much faster
rate than we can then there will be ways
in which we can guess and check faster
as well
by using either narrow AI to help us out
with some of the computation required
for that or you know Elon Musk is going
to come up with the neural implant
that's going to up the whatever the
clock speed is of the brain we're a long
way away from that kind of thing anyway
but once we have AGI I see no reason why
we wouldn't also have the capacity to
turn ourselves into cyborgs I was saying
recently that we're kind of already
cyborgs you know here I am wearing
glasses this is a hardware upgrade on
the lines you know my Apple watch here
is a hardware upgrade you know most
people carry their phone with them
everywhere your part cyborg already your
part you know artificial intelligence
anyway we're kind of artificial general
intelligence as it is as it stands
um but
their their argument was that
even
YouTube
even YouTube the algorithm that runs
YouTube is not aligned with our
interests
because it recommends videos that you
want this according to them was a
misalignment of values this was not in
line with human values and why
because if you are presented over and
again the kind of videos that you want
to watch when you're on YouTube this
isn't good for you you become addicted
to YouTube and you go down rabbit holes
and this kind of thing in other words
these three intellectuals were telling
the rest of us that we don't know what's
good for ourselves
that if YouTube recommends a video that
we want to watch we don't know what's
good for us they do they know what's
good for us if only they had access to
the algorithm they'd be pushing out
science documentaries and
um uh economic policies that aligned
with their political views uh ideas
about how to vote and what to think
about all sorts of hot button issues of
the day what to think about the AI
um issue
so this is what their understanding of
alignment is their understanding of
alignment is not
that
you should come up you should generate
your morality within certain bounds
the bounds that are generally acceptable
by Society but rather alignment means
you have to agree with them
including when it comes to what YouTube
videos to watch so their example that
the YouTube algorithm
constantly recommending to you videos
you want to watch when those videos
are the kinds of things that can rot
your brain that kind of stuff they're
too entertaining too many cat videos
that's bad for you this is their concept
of alignment
so yeah there was a poverty there of um
I would say reasoning on that issue
and there was one other quote I just
wrote down of Sam's
um
when we have super intelligence he said
you know the thing that is a thousand
times more intelligent than us
this leads to a contradiction in what he
was saying but he did say it quote
when we have super intelligence the end
of our concerns
will occur then
the end of our cons the end of our
concerns will occur then what he means
is that human beings
because we are a thousand times less
intelligent than this imaginary super
intelligence we won't matter we won't
matter to the system that is a thousand
times more intelligent than us we will
be like ants okay this constant ant
thing comes up it comes up all the time
what is the system going to do when it
stands in relation to us as we stand in
relation to ants and as I say there is
no such system possible because we are
Universal in our capacity to explain you
can't be more Universal Universal there
is nothing higher on the hierarchy than
us all you can have is a speed up in
processing power and increased memory we
already have the capacity to speed up in
many ways using computers using
calculators we already have increased
memory using computers we already
augment ourselves with this stuff we
already think faster and remember more
than our ancestors did by many orders of
magnitude because of the speed up given
to us by technology already
people want to have it directly in our
brains okay that's coming too okay but
this idea that just because you think
faster or you have more memory
or let's concede come up with
explanations at a greater rate that
doesn't mean that system stands in
relation to us as we stand in relation
to ants ants don't come up with
explanations at all at all
we can in principle come up with any
explanation and so could the system that
can come up with explanations faster
than us so that's that
but also moreover adding to this
if you are a super intelligent system a
thousand times more intelligent than us
your morality will be better as well
you're not going to regard people as
ants
you're going to regard them as people
fully fledged
morally valuable important people
that you don't want to wipe out
so it's just there was contradictions
throughout the uh the episode
um
you know I agreed with as I say the
first part the explainer part was about
the Transformer and various other kinds
of
uh recent contemporary versions of AI
and the algorithms and you know how they
work that was all fine but they did fall
into this as always into this rank
pessimism
um excuse me while I have a drink by the
way I'm going to be drinking throughout
uh regular viewers of the live stream
will know that this is what I do
thank you
let me go to some other questions now
we have quite a few underneath um the uh
the tweet I put out
David Hearn is just being provocative as
always and saying Marmite is greater
than Vegemite
and David Hearn being
well if you're going to be that you know
you're going to be that provocative
David of course you would say that
you're British we know what the British
um you know relationship to Cuisine is
so of course you're going to think of
malmite's better than Vegemite you've
got no taste
I actually I don't like Marmite at all I
do like Vegemite I just what can you say
um
Australians do have a silly habit at
times you know of
having people who visit our country try
out Vegemite but they always put too
much on it's like a challenge I don't do
that I want people to enjoy Vegemite I
think vegemite's good but it has to be
spread sparsely over hot toast with
butter you don't hand it to people by
the Spoonful yeah um that of course
turns them off but you know you're wrong
okay David that's a that's a that's a
simple
um refutation Vegemite is better than
Marmite
um
Joe has asked has have I read Ian
mckilchrist what do I think of his books
I'm afraid I haven't so again that's an
easy question I'm sorry I haven't read
his books
um
porcel
has asked
I'll read out the question uh do you
think it will be possible to formalize
the concept of a universal explainer in
a clean mathematical way similar to
Turing universality if so how would you
start to formalize intuitive
non-explicit thinking how different
would it be from alphago intuitions
so yes it must be possible to formalize
the concept of universal explainer in a
clean mathematical way I would say
because well it depends on what you mean
by clean and mathematical it has to be
possible to write down an algorithm for
what a universal explainer is
yes because
everything in the physical world is
computable every single physical system
is computable that's David Deutsch's
proof and that includes us our brains
what our brains are doing what our minds
are doing that is a physical process
going on there and so therefore it has
to be able to be described
by some algorithm some set of
um you know motions of
the particles or something okay but but
there has to be a way of describing that
mathematically we're not there yet we
have no clue
um how would I start I wouldn't have any
idea what I would say however
how different would it be from alphago
intuitions well firstly they have this
we have this problem in AI starting with
the term AI okay the I intelligence and
AI isn't at all intelligence it's got
nothing to do with the capacity to
generate explanatory knowledge it's got
nothing to do with real creativity
all it is is about automating certain
things that can be automated that's what
artificial intelligence is at the moment
so we have this problem with language
and so therefore when we get to
um
you know things like alphago and its
intuitions
there is no such thing as an alphago
intuition
one alphago does
the the program is pattern matching and
so what they call intuitions is just
this is a particular strategy that was
shown to have worked many many times in
winning games and they call this you
know kind of intuition but it's a
misapplication of that term intuition
it's not a real intuition
um
yes uh so yeah but other than that I how
would I start to formalize non-explicit
thinking I have no clue I have no clue
um if I did
um well I'd be famous someday uh tadas
asks how do you think about inspiration
is it another form of inexplicit
knowledge
um
well yes
um all feelings all emotions
result from some kind of knowledge in an
offense are a kind of knowledge
why do people become fearful
well they have knowledge that
the thing in front of them is a threat
of some sort
remember knowledge is conjectural so you
could be wrong
you know you wake up in the middle of
the night and you think that someone's
standing at the top of you but no it's
just a coat you've left on the code rack
okay but the fear comes from your guess
your Notch okay your your explanation
that thing is a threat in some way now
you're wrong about that so what the
thing you know just isn't so
um so inspiration is kind of like this
is it a form of inexplicit knowledge yes
how do we become inspired well it's
certainly a Feeling
it's where you have the thought or
something and then you feel the desire
to continue want to continue doing that
thing
uh at least that's my experience of
inspiration you often it comes from
outside of course
doesn't have to but someone will say
something or you will see something
and that will prompt a thought which
gives you a specific kind of feeling and
a specific kind of feeling is now I want
to do a thing
in particular usually it's an
intellectual or creative thing of some
kind
that's what inspiration is a certain
kind of feeling
given
knowledge that you have just conjectured
about something that's happened
typically from the outside okay but you
can be inspired from the inside of
course you could be
um you know people talk about shower
thoughts right you're in the shower and
you you think of something then you're
inspired to
write the poem construct the blog posts
go and tweet write an essay compose the
piece of music whatever it happens to be
um when people are outside there
probably the two distinctions that you'd
make is when people are very much
isolated and on their own they can be
inspired because they're not being
distracted by other thoughts
and on the other hand when people really
are distracted by other stuff they can
be inspired so you can be inspired in
all sorts of
ways and places what I would say is of
course inspiration generally comes when
people are relaxed that's not the
question of course but that's how I
think about inspiration in general it is
a kind of inexplicit knowledge I would
say that all emotions are a kind of an
implicit knowledge
they're telling they're giving you
information
about your psychology
which may be telling you something about
the world
the feeling that you're being watched
doesn't come from nowhere the feeling of
fear that some people say they have
walking down a street late at night
doesn't come from nowhere
you can pick up all sorts of cues and
you kind of always put it into words you
know why do I feel
um sad about this thing why do I feel
excited about this thing why do I feel
fearful about this thing these various
senses that we have
sometimes we can't explain why but they
indicate something that's really going
on
um you know the one of the reasons that
psychology at its best exists to try and
get you to put into words what it is but
with inspiration yes
um
moving on tanveer Ahmed
maybe for a later episode
there's a
girardian tribe that thinks Meneses is
the basis of a lot of things would like
to see Gerard's memetic Theory from
Papa's angle well I don't know about
this tribe I know what Meneses is you
know this uh sort of knowledge via
stories okay or stories as the basis of
a lot of things yeah okay well there's
been a lot of cultures like that
um
I don't know Gerard's memetic Theory
Guardian guardian yeah I'm not familiar
with this what would Papa say about that
in general though this idea that you
have knowledge embedded in stories yes
absolutely of course you can the most
famous example is of course
uh the Bible
Jesus tells stories via Parables there's
not moral knowledge in those uh
yeah there's lots of ways in which we
have knowledge embedded in deep wisdom
is often embedded in ancient stories
and what would Papa say about that yeah
well it's all conjectural it's all
congenital knowledge that could be right
it could be wrong
there's ways of refuting it these are
knowledge claims
which some people know for a while
sometimes I know their best idea
um but
institutions can embed knowledge just as
stories can and you can so it doesn't
have to be Papa's conception of
knowledge is not restricted to purely
explicit claims about the physical world
even though it's sometimes cast in that
it's just about what science says it's
about everything it's about absolutely
all kinds of knowledge all knowledge is
conjectural an attempt to capture
something that works
might not be true but it works for you
it may contain truth in so far as it is
a claim about the physical world
but again as we always say our final
truth
and Nick has asked
something that Papa said doesn't make
sense to me I do not regard philosophy
this is Papa quote
um I haven't looked this up so I don't
know
I'm taking it on
faith that the court is accurate that
Papa said it sounds like something Bob
would say quote I do not regard
philosophy as an attempt to clarify
analyze or Define concepts of words end
quote
and a Nick has asked
but isn't defining Concepts necessary
for better explanations okay
um
so
popper existed in a context the context
is
that he was
he often had in his mind my disease he
often had in his mind the prevailing
philosophy of his time
is great opponent
who was Wittgenstein and Ludwig
Wittgenstein was always arguing about
the importance or the Primacy of
language and in particular that you
needed to to find words and so the
the there's an entire School of
philosophy linguistic philosophy which
is about this which says that precisely
that
there's no real philosophical problems
it's just about trying to get your
language clear trying to Define terms
and so this is what Papa meant by
philosophy is not about it's not just
about talking about words
do you need defining Concepts do you
need to Define Concepts
in order to have better explanations is
that necessary depends on what you mean
by Define
if by Define you mean you have to have
the meaning of the word set in stone
once and for all otherwise you can't
have a good explanation or a better
explanation then no
we can have a very good explanation of
particle physics without ever requiring
that you define what an electron is
we can admit that they do exist these
things called electrons they've got a
negative charge
but we can also admit that there is an
infinite amount of complexity in an
electron that we can continue to
um
understand this thing with ever
increased accuracy over time it's our
theories about particles change
you know it used to be thought well it
used to be thought that the electrons
were embedded like a bit of fruit in a
plum pudding and the The Plum Pudding
being the atom and then it became the
electron was orbiting the nucleus like a
planet orbits the Sun and then it became
the quantum vision
of the electron as well people went
through a phase where they really
thought it was like waves and particles
simultaneously somehow or other or
depending upon what experiment you do
and now we understand electrons as
these things that kind of like particles
but not exactly classical conception
spread across the Multiverse
with multiple instances of itself in any
one place at a time and across the
Multiverse more seems like a wave but in
any one single Universe it's more like a
particle
we say that these other instances of the
electron uncountably many of them are
fungible instances of the electron
sometimes if they're in the same place
with the same
momentum but also instances of them with
various okay or the electron itself can
have various values for its momentum and
its position simultaneously so it's it's
this complicated object as David Deutsch
says it's more like an ink blot but even
then that can be misleading so
do we need to Define what electronism
can we just admit that these things
exist
now repeat that for absolutely
everything ever
papa says you don't need to Define
things to solve your problems you just
want to have a deeper understanding it's
not necessary
to Define things people want to Define
things you know in a philosophical
debate let them Define the terms
agree with their definitions and then
talk about the substance of the matter
people want to pin down definitions so
that they can debate the meaning of the
word but that's not solving any
philosophical problem the most
fundamental thing you can say to someone
in a philosophical discussion when it's
going nowhere is what problem are you
trying to solve what is your problem
that can be charged I suppose what's
your problem but but really that's what
for Papa it comes down to it's about
problems
in philosophy and we want to try and
solve them how do we continue to make
progress okay progress slow down in
physics okay what's the problem here the
problem is the slowing of the progress
in physics what do we do about that
should we
more clearly Define
the meanings of particles then maybe we
can have this unification of General
relatively and quantum theory if only we
can define space-time and what you know
the the quarks and leptons are then we
can unify these things no of course not
okay the problem is we want to figure
out
um I deeper understanding of reality
uh
is there a Quantum of space-time or not
we don't know okay
so there is there are these unsolved
problems
so I hope that answers our next question
I sometimes wonder if people are
trolling me here the next question is by
vipin and vipin has asked what is the
true definition of creativity
the true definition of creativity well
again there is no true definition of
creativity I don't even really have a
definition I would say that creativity
is
not like innovation
but they're related
creativity is the thing you have before
an innovation an innovation
uh is when you come up with something
new and it could be for you I suppose
but
um that's the really valuable thing one
product of creativity is innovation
the other product of creativity is
object failure
so we're creating things all the time
we're trying them out in the world what
it means is you've come up for yourself
with something new or original
if it works that's an innovation you've
learned something if it fails then it's
not it's still a bit of creativity
but
it hasn't achieved anything
so again what is the true definition of
creativity I would just say um the
capacity
to generate something original but you
know that's circular then you'll say to
me what does the word generate mean well
it means create okay there is no getting
away from this
problem
when people demand definitions of
circularity
okay or just
assertion mirror assertion either you're
going to Simply assert something
or you're going to be led into an
infinite regress
okay I say I Define creativity in terms
of Generation generation is defined as
what coming up with something new what
is coming up with something new mean
what means a creation
I mean something original all these
words kind of mean the same thing so you
can't get to the the bottom as it were
of what any word means
all you can do is just have an
understanding of it the conjectural
understanding rather than a definition
uh Roshan Ali asks
can you speak about the fine-tuning of
the universe that section in Boi
confuses me specifically why does it
need to be explained even if variations
of constants still permit life
um
so I would urge
you Roshan to go to my fine-tuning
episode then
discussing that section of the beginning
of infinity that's why I made those
videos I made those videos specifically
so
if anyone is in the position where well
no I specifically made the video so that
I would understand the chapters better
that was the first and primary reason
uh the second reason which is a happy
benefit is that other people find these
things useful and so I have explained
the creation chapter
chapter four of the beginning of
infinity
in my video series in two parts one of
which is called fine tuning when we're
all about devoted entirely to
functioning all of that said because I
can't obviously recapitulate that
approximately hour-long episode here
right now
uh let me answer the question
very variations of the contents of
nature would allow life to continue
that's true
so for example
um let me try and remember the numbers
here
is it the charge on an electron is
1.602 times 10 to the power of minus 19
coulombs I think
and that is the same as the charge on
the proton okay so that's the the
electrical charge on these things of
course the electron is negative and the
proton is positive okay has a specific
charge
and so that charge tells you how
strongly
electrons are going to repel one another
and so that has consequences for Atomic
bonding which is all about you know
electrons repelling each other and ions
positively charged atoms Loosely
speaking
um attracting and bonding you know atoms
bonding together so if you change the
charge on electron by
a fraction of a percent let's say
um one ten thousandth of what it is then
chemistry will change a bit but you'd
still be able to have life life would
still arise but
if you doubled the charge on an electron
this wouldn't be the case
atoms would repel one another they
wouldn't be able to bond
carbon is not going to bond with itself
in the same way that it does
so this is one example a better example
is of course the value of gravity g
equals whatever it is
okay the the universal gravitational
constant set throughout the Universe
determines the strength of gravity
throughout the Universe
and it appears in Newton's theory of
gravity this letter G it's a particular
value depending upon what units you use
and it has a it appears in Einstein's
general relativity it sets the strength
of gravity
if the value of G was much greater than
what it is I can't remember exactly the
the amount by which you need to change
it but let's say let's say you changed
it by 10 increased you increase G the
value of gravity that this gravitational
constant by 10 then
all bowls of gas that would otherwise
form into Stars would collapse into
black holes all of them which means
you'd have a universe of nothing but
black holes
boring Universe a universe without life
without planets
um and so therefore we wouldn't be here
to ask the question about why G has the
value that it does on the other hand if
you made G 10 less than what it is
gravity would be 10 weaker
and balls of gas that would otherwise
collapse into Stars would merely heat up
expand without Fusion ever beginning I'm
not sure it's exactly 10 you look these
numbers up but this is the idea right
this is the idea now it's finely tuned
because you can't have a huge range of G
the value for the gravitational constant
without one of these two things
happening I had everything collapsing
into black holes or no stars forming at
all
this is the fine tuning of G now repeat
that for absolutely every single
constant the charge on the electron the
speed of light the rate at which the
universe is expanding the fine structure
constant which had something to do with
these things as well
there are many many
um constants there is a cosmologist
who's on
um Twitter Luke Barnes Australian now
not only because he's Australian
uh
uh but also because I would regard him
as just about the world's leading expert
on this question of fine tuning his blog
is absolutely amazing he's an academic
at the University of Western Sydney he
wrote a book with garant Lewis from the
University of Sydney called a fortunate
universe
all about this stuff okay the the how
the constants if you change any of them
by a little bit
you won't get live some very like as
Russia some of them variations still
permit life but not all and this is the
point this is why the fine cheating is a
problem we don't understand why the
values of the constants are the way they
are
the two
the
the two solutions that are usually put
up are either well the dials have been
fixed for all these constants so
precisely that someone has done that
something or someone normally given a
particular name that we all know God
okay God has designed the universe in
such a way the other alternative is
and this is the max tegmark idea but
it's not only him and the
lots of people say this that
were all the possible values of the
contents are out there somewhere
we just happen to occupy one of the
universes multiverses where the
constants are what they are and so here
we are
it shouldn't be surprising
that's a bad explanation in David
deutsche's terminology
because it explains absolutely any
anything at all
now the other issue is
that
changing the constants is one thing
changing the value of these physical
constants you know the speed of light
appears in
certain equations you know the charge on
electron appears in certain equations
Planck's constant appears in certain
equations G appears in certain equations
okay well that's one issue
they appear in the physical the form of
the physical laws the mathematical form
of the physical laws but the
mathematical form of the physical laws
could also be changed if you have this
Multiverse of multiverses normally
called the the uh the plenitude the
plenitude is
the set of all universes with every
logically possible set of physical laws
and logically possible doesn't have to
mean conceivable because perhaps we are
limited by our brains in this universe
and what they can physically what
they're physically capable of doing if
there are aliens in universes that
obey different physical laws and those
aliens will have brains obeying
different physical laws so they can
probably imagine or they can imagine
different things to us
because their brains are operating via a
different set of computational laws than
what our brains are so they can compute
different things the things they can
prove are different the mathematical
things they can prove it different they
can imagine different things so the the
logically the logically possible set of
universes
if they existed in physical reality in
some way they had some physical reality
to them lots of those would have you
know people in them as well but the
overall majority wouldn't
okay Luke Barnes is the guy on Twitter
anyway as well as on closer to Truth
where he discusses this stuff Paul
Davies discusses this stuff
um yes
um what what David says there is that
the more constants you put together the
the the more remarkable this fine-tuning
thing happens to be but you can't
measure universes and the important
thing
the way in which you count universes to
say that this proportion of universes uh
contains is friendly to life and this
proportion of universes wouldn't
befriended A Life That's not easily
mathematically countable the way in
which you order these things I won't go
into that now that's back uh yes on my
in my video about all of this stuff and
I think if you just type in my name
Brett Hall fine tuning into Google you
should get at least one or two articles
on my website specifically about this
stuff as well I've written long pieces
about this
um Anton Schmitz has asked how can we
apply papyrian epistemology to
organizations or companies can we use
its lessons to create better
organizational knowledge yes
I'm not an expert in this but there's
only one way to create knowledge there's
only one way to improve things which is
via conjecture and refutation and so
what I would say is organizations or
companies need to avoid doing the thing
that has traditionally been done which
is an authoritarian top-down approach
where the higher your rank as supervisor
manager senior manager you know CEO
chairman whatever chairperson
that that system
should not be regarded as a system of
competence
it should be regarded as a system
instead of particular skill
so the CEO has a particular skill about
how to do their job
but shouldn't be expected to know how to
do anyone else in the company's job
unless perhaps they've held that job at
some point but even then you know things
can change and so that's what I mean by
it's not a hierarchy of competence yeah
the CEO isn't the person who is most
competent in the entire company but
rather the CEO as the person who should
be the most competent at performing that
role in the company
that would be the piperian view but the
traditional view is of course well
they're the boss so they will tell you
how to do your job okay I'm sure many
companies are not like this by the way I
don't hear of well I do hear
of of companies where
managers by virtue of the fact that
they're the manager
think they know how
to do the job better than the person
that they're managing but what they
should be is a good manager they
shouldn't be the best person at doing
that other role
that should be good at managing people
and so this is what I would say about
preparing epistemology because
it allows every single recognize that
every single person is a creative entity
you can learn and develop expertise in
that particular role to the point where
they become the most competent person
obviously when they're training this
isn't true obviously when they're Pony
but modulo that assume everyone has been
in the company for
five years occupying their present roles
for the last five years okay that's
unlikely if that is the case then
everyone would be the most competent
person in that role the CEO is not going
to know better than the you know team
leader what how did lead a team
that small team anyway and the team
leader is not going to know better how
to do that specific job that the person
is doing
that that that's what preparing
epistemology would say which stands in
stark contrast to the authoritarian
mobs where
you know the manager is walking around
the floor you know like a teacher
telling people what to do telling
micromanaging this whole concept of
micromanaging that's where that would
would come from
I suppose we would say
pulpirin epistemology
as applied to a company is the perfect
refutation of micromanaging
because micromanaging is
authoritarianism
it is saying by virtue of my position my
rank in the hierarchy I know better than
you not because I have a better
explanation but because I have greater
Authority
okay
in the distant future all companies can
be
collaborations where the CEO technically
isn't High more highly ranked
than everyone else but rather has a
specific role
which is that set of you know tasks that
the CEO does
all right anyway
asks
why is the reach of a good explanation
determined by how hard to vary it is
it's not it's not oh he's giving me a
reference referring to Pages 28 to 29 of
Boi
okay
I'm going to check that in a minute for
the bolt and would you consider doing a
new top cast episodes on chapter on a
chapter already covered like chapter one
of Boi oh yeah well I've thought about
that before yes um
foreign
yes I don't
disagree with anything I said I think
the substance of what I say in my very
first episode on the being of infinity
holds true I've listened to it recently
because I've been making these shorts
episodes and putting them up on
um YouTube and on Twitter
so
I I doubt I could sound terrible but I
doubt I could improve on the substance
of what I said but I can certainly
improve on the presentation I was
halting
more shy
um
reticent to be more confident I suppose
on camera than I am now and so that
would be a change I would make so I
would re-record or perhaps re-explain
chapter one just for those reasons for
matters of style I suppose more than
anything else
um but otherwise I think that you know
what that episode that first episode of
well it's not first well one of the
First episodes of top casts and those
first few episodes of top cast I think
they still stand the test of time in the
sense that
I don't think anything I say there would
would be phrased differently
I don't think that I would necessarily
be able to improve my explanations
but the presentation or the tone might
be different I suppose I could pre
possibly more engaging okay
um but okay well let's go to two bolts
challenge I'm regarding it as a
challenge he says why is the reach of a
good explanation determined by how hard
it is to vary
how hard to vary it is
before I go there I'm just going to say
the reach of a good explanation has
nothing to do with how hard very it is
because a a good explanation is hard to
vary but you can have I can have a good
explanation of where my cat is right now
I can have a good explanation where my
cat is okay it happens to be in the
other room right now I know that because
I saw it walking there
now and the doors are closed so it has
no other options
um
but that has no reach that has no reach
that explanation reach means it applies
elsewhere
some explanations have reached some it
good explanation coverage in particular
physics explanations have reached
chemistry explanations have for each
science explanations in general have
reach
when Newton
came up with the universal law of
gravitation that's a good explanation
it's hard to vary
and it has reach
in what sense does it have reach
it reaches out from his desk where he
wrote it down
to Mars the Andromeda galaxy and
everywhere throughout the universe
that's reach it reaches into those
places to govern what's going on there
as well
the same is true of
chemistry explanations
biology explanation certainly evolution
by natural selection reaches throughout
the Universe we expect that there's only
one way that life can arise
and gain diversity
which is random mutations and then
selections
okay until you have intelligent design
like we can do but let's go to okay the
challenges there 28 Pages 28 to 29 of
um
the beginning Infinity so let me Loop
yourself I'll just bring it up on my
Kindle Here and Now
I could be wrong you know I'm always
so 28 and
second and I'm mumbling to myself
thank you
okay
page 28.
um
so
ah okay so I've been on page 27 actually
so where David first mentions reach
he's talking about the
Seasons explanation the axis tilt
explanation for seasons
on Earth
and
is basically saying look once
that season's explanation had been
explained as applying to one hemisphere
it reached around to the other
atmosphere it applied there but not only
there it also applied to any other
planets which was tilted on its axis any
other plant that was tilted on its axis
therefore would have seasons
as it orbited the sun David says quote
this reach of explanations is another
another meaning of the beginning of
infinity it is the ability of some of
them to solve problems Beyond those that
they were created to solve that's the
meaning of the reach of explanations
not determined by how hard to vary it is
that's a separate issue
but skip
and find where he talks about how to
vary
he goes on to say the reach of an
explanation is not a principle of
induction it is not something that the
creator of the explanation can use to
obtain or justify it is not part of the
creative process at all we find out
about it only after we have the
explanation sometimes long after it has
nothing to do with extrapolation or
induction or it's arriving a theory in
any other alleged way it is exactly the
other way around
the reason that the explanation of
Seasons reaches far outside the expenses
of creators it's precisely that it does
not have to be extrapolated yeah it's
just it's universal theory it's like
the Einstein's general relativity just
applies everywhere for all times not
only at all points in space throughout
the Universe but at all times in the
past and in the future that's the
universality it doesn't need to be
extrapolated
um
there's nothing here I'm afraid
to bolt about
hard to vary
so no rather than
Linger on this any longer yeah I'm
afraid
the answer to the question your question
is why is the reach of a good
explanation determined by how hard it is
to by how hard to vary it is
it isn't
the reach of a good explanation is
determined by what it is explaining
if it is explaining a phenomena that
exists throughout the Universe then it
applies throughout the Universe but if
it's explaining the phenomena of the
location of the cat in my apartment it
applies to my cat and to no other cats
it's not a universal claim it has zero
reach it doesn't go beyond my apartment
or my cat so
um yes reach is a property of a specific
category of explanations
those explanations that apply to
multiple entities okay you might have a
an explanation you might have an
explanation of Tesla cars
that don't doesn't apply throughout the
Universe but applies to Tesla cars okay
for example
so it has some reach but not Universal
reach necessarily uh to Bob goes on to
ask other questions are there any other
theories that could be good candidates
to be added to the fabric of reality or
even if they wouldn't fit what do you
consider as good explanations worth
exploring
well construct a theory these days of
course would possibly be added there but
it there's a question about whether in
David's terminology he would even admit
that it counts as a
good explanation at this point a
conjecture
although it is a revealing you know uh
it's making progress it's making
progress but David's always very modest
about these things
perhaps he would include that now you
know it's been some
what 25 well coming up to
30 years no yes
it's been a long life since the fabric
of reality now so
yeah there's
there's that I suppose um people have
said what about
economics you know could economics be
added there could you have or political
systems but I think those are
those are consequences of just the right
epistemology epistemology is the main
thing you know how do you generate
knowledge Okay so
why wouldn't you put an economic theory
in there well because
economic theories about how to create
wealth wealth is just a kind of
knowledge about how to achieve certain
Transformations the repertoire of
Transformations you can make so
the way to generate wealth is which is
an economic theory is logically entailed
by how to generate knowledge which is
epistemology
and for similar reasons
um all other you know
things like that like political theories
they would come into that as well you
know how to create the knowledge of how
to keep a society
um resilient and that kind of thing
well that comes out of epistemology
but you know I'm sure that you could put
in you know more chapters maybe David
had more chapters and he he just paired
it down to four I don't know but uh
broadly speaking
I don't have any suggestions for other
theories that could be good candidates
to be added apart from what I've just
said but there's an argument for many of
those things being subsumed you know
it's like
the best the best case I've heard is you
know Nevada last wasn't the gem why
isn't relativity in there and the reason
relativity isn't in this because David
explicitly says that he regards quantum
theory as the deeper of the two theories
quantum theory versus relativity and so
you know
maybe one day we will have
a space-time geometry of the Multiverse
or something like that a geometry of The
Monuments which would be you know uh
or a quantum uh the theory of quantum
gravitational Computing which would be
the theory that you could put into the
fabric of reality of Next Century let's
say
but we're not there yet sir that would
be my answer to that
too well what is the another question
what is the role if any of rules of
thumb in understanding the world
um
yeah well in understanding the world a
rule of thumb is just a pragmatic way of
taking action
when perhaps you don't have a good
explanation just do this thing often
called a heuristic
um
you know I I don't always have
a good explanation for precisely the way
in which I make my tea
an explicit explanation
I just have rules of thumb I think many
of us have rules of thumb throughout our
life
in order to make things more efficient
you don't always need to have a highly
coherent highly explicit good
explanation of everything you do
throughout the day in your personal life
you just go by rules of thumb
okay
it's about time I had a haircut I don't
have a good explanation about precisely
the length that I need to have my hair
cut at it's just a you know it's a
feeling it's inexplicit rule of thumb is
about every you know once a month
something like that
so I don't know about understanding the
world what the role of rules of thumb
are accepting you always you always in
science there comes a point at which you
reach the inexplicit
and
you know the great physicists will talk
about their intuitions that this thing
feels right and so they do this
particular thing so they have rules of
thumb anyone does mathematics realize
there are rules of thumb there and you
develop an intuition for being able to
get to the solution of a particular
problem let's say
all right so that's that appears to me
to be Twitter stuff I'll just double
check nothing new has
come along
uh
chupin Quan has asked can you discuss
how much is the research field of
Economics as a social science adhering
to the papyrian conjunction refutation
practice
um my answer that is I don't know
um the research field of Economics I'm
not sure
all I know is that whenever I look at
economics and I think I talked about
this and one of the other live streams
what I find with economics
is that rather a lot of it okay let's
put Austrian economics aside
is about the role that government should
have in the economic system
what interest rates should be you know
how they should intervene to set prices
on this or that
and so that becomes economics
so I don't yeah I don't know
um
there's also a problem here of um
you don't want your economic policy
to require testing in the same sense as
a scientific
Theory requires testing
because
if you start testing various economic
theories you run the real risk of
causing huge suffering it's the same
kind of idea because economics and the
the intersection of economics and
morality
is large you don't want to have to test
your moral theories to find out which
one causes more suffering this is why we
have principles we can come to
understand or ideals as I say
our understanding of any moral principle
or ideal is imperfect or we have access
to is an imperfect understanding of
things like don't destroy the means of
error correction let's say that can be
our ideal it doesn't have to be an
unalterable Foundation what it can be is
our best understanding of how to ensure
progress continues over time
okay
you don't need to test that out there in
the real world it just is it's a claim
that you can make which doesn't need to
be falsifiable
the same as
you know
um
all humans are created equal yeah all
humans are born equal I think we all
have the same moral worth
that doesn't need to be tested that's
just a thing that you
you take as a premise and perhaps we can
understand it better over time but
that's our understanding of it now is
our understanding of it now
I would regard economic principles as
kind of like that
so you don't need to
um try and test them
in the real world what you say is well
what I'm saying is if you want to
maximize
wealth creation
which is what the domain of Economics
ostensibly is about is about how wealth
moves throughout a society and that's
called the economy
and it includes money and goods and
trade and all that sort of stuff the
free exchange of the creativity of
people one with another
a basic principle of which I would say
is that if you've got a service and I
require your service then we should be
free to exchange
your service for my money my value for
your value
and a third party doesn't have any
interest in that
there's our principal now of course we
live in a society where the third party
does everyone else in society apparently
does have a claim on that
via the government by the taxation
system okay so there we have a
difference in principles
but let's say you agree that only one
other party has a claim on the
transaction so there can be
um three people three entities rather
you offering the service me wanting to
purchase your services
and the government
but no one else
you know but then of course you know so
so therefore the the mafia is not a
legitimate
you know
um parties that come along and say well
now you've got to pay us protection
money which is what some people regard
you know parts of the government has
okay I'm not I'm neither a
narco-capitalist
nor a socialist so I I occupy this
position of minimal government and think
the institutions are very important but
at the same time I think we should be
incrementally moving towards
smaller gaffer because at the moment the
government is
rather large and taxes rather highly
and all signs are that progress
knowledge creation and optimism would be
much greater
things could occur
better
and be better for everyone
if we just reduced you know certain
regulations and taxes and that kind of
thing none of that is to say that the
institutions of government are
unimportant I could make a case that
they are very important but
sometimes there's overreach all right
so now let me go to the YouTube
um questions of which there are only a
few
um
John ortitz asks
I want to know more about Constructor
Theory what prerequisite should I know
the first person to get in contact with
is Logan chipkin
and on Twitter he is chipkin Logan
I follow him so if you just look at my
followers you'll see him among those and
he's a
great promoter of Constructor Theory
the first thing to do is to watch
David's YouTube you know expositions of
constructed Theory Chiara my letters
I would buy the science of Canon carts
watch my videos they're now complete I
just need to talk to Kiara herself
interview Kiara about that
so if you want to know constructive
theory the science of Canon cart the
book by Kiara
perhaps watch my videos watch David's
for one of another term lectures
presentations on constructed Theory
Kiara's stuff on constructive theory and
and look up chipkin Logan chipkin who is
a great Expositor of these ideas as well
and has interviewed David and and and
and Kiara about this
um so yes worth getting into
um he's his stuff
Adil zishan has asked would you explain
the naturalistic fallacy why it's wrong
and any of its common manifestations in
science or philosophy thanks
um so the naturalistic fallacy is if a
thing is natural then it's good
Healthy Living people are like this you
know you should eat raw food because raw
food is natural and if you cook things
that might burn them and that can cause
cancer and cooking is not natural but
eating raw stuff is
I don't know what they think about
funnel web spider venom or snake venom
that's natural
what do you say about that what do you
say about chemotherapy that's unnatural
so the naturalistic fallacy is just
because a thing is natural it has arisen
via evolution by natural selection that
therefore is virtuous in some way so
it's completely false
common manifestations in science or
philosophy
um I don't I can't think of anything off
the top of my head
um
you know perhaps in Morality you know
people talk about
well look at the altruism that exists
in monkeys and primates and stuff
altruism is good isn't it
euron Brook is great on altruism
he did I watched an episode of his
recently one of his clips from YouTube
where he was talking about Mr Beast Mr
Beast is the biggest YouTuber of all
YouTubers and you know multi-millionaire
you know I think it's worth 50 million
dollars or something just for making
YouTube videos
and Mr Beast gives away a lot of stuff
he gives away money he gives away cars
uh he recently
there was he was in the news there's
controversy about him because he
he helped a thousand blind people I
think it was a thousand uh regain their
sight and people were criticizing him
why would you criticize that they were
saying he was just doing it for the
clicks he was just doing it for you know
social media Kudos even if he was who
cares why is that a reason to criticize
him
but euron Brooke was making the point
that you know this is not altruism on
his part altruism is a Bad Thing
altruism is where
you give away stuff
for No Gain purportedly no gain
the more it hurts you the better it is
it's the Christian idea of giving arms
you should expect nothing in return
nothing
you know Jesus was the great altruist
where he gave up his life for everyone
else and this is supposed to be the
Pinnacle of what a person does
yeah expect nothing in return just
um
work for others not for yourself and
Iran's idea is of course the opposite to
that work for yourself and by doing that
you actually help other people far more
you know so when Mr Beast gives away
stuff which is Charity you're on
Brooke's point was
well he was saying you can't say this is
altruism you know because
yeah he might be getting the clicks and
he might be getting
uh Kudos and he's getting all sorts of
stuff himself return to him that doesn't
make it bad but we exist in a culture of
altruism
where you're supposed to be altruistic
and if you do get anything in its own if
you make a profit by being nice to
people by curing blindness let's say
that is somehow diminished
by the fact that you got something in
return for that
Kudos publicity more followers something
like that
but that is a hang up
of Christianity Christianity has virtue
in it but this is not one of the virtues
there's nothing wrong with doing
something and getting something in
return
there's nothing wrong with profit
the prophet motive leads to a much
better world
if everyone was giving up
their time for free the world would
grind to a halt the world cannot run on
altruism so the naturalistic fallacy
here is
even if it was true
that
Gibbons and chimpanzees were altruistic
and I doubt they are that wouldn't make
it good
so that's um yeah
that's the naturalistic fallacy
uh Max lenning has asked if anyone else
has a question feel free to ask
um Max has asked could David Deutsche
theory of explanations be unification of
theory of knowledge Evolution and
computation yes it is yeah yeah his his
idea of hard to vary explanations as the
thing that we are
sort of focused on the thing that leads
to progress in society and civilization
the very thing that underpins why it is
we make rapid progress
coupled with this cultural criticism
that is a search the culture of
criticism exists because we have this
search for better and better
explanations to improve our lot
um that that is the theory of knowledge
and the theory of knowledge also
explains Evolution now it's not
explanatory knowledge now
but it is a sense it is a kind of hard
to vary knowledge okay biological
knowledge the knowledge in your genome
change it a little bit and you've got a
tumor
generally speaking you know organisms
are hard to vary you vary them and they
tend to go extinct
okay or vary The genome for any given
individual and it tends to die
okay so this is a hard to very thing
computation is sort of related to this
because well every physical system is
computable
all knowledge creation systems
which are people at the moment human
beings
and the knowledge that is in evolution
by natural selection in organism Finance
evolution by natural selection these
amount to kinds of computation so this
is this is the way in which it's Unified
so all
all systems that generate knowledge are
Computing stuff in a sense there's a
kind of computation that's going on
and
it's it's a method of error correction
which is also what digital Computing is
is fundamentally about
okay
Adil has asked could you explain what
popper meant by the pragmatic pragmatic
problem of induction
well it's the same as the the regular
problem of induction this idea that well
you need to try and explain how it is
that you get to a particular Theory
uh there's
what we're after are explanations
we're not after generalizations of
observations
the problem was
that
the
greatest success was had by Euclid in
ancient Greece
you know you could lay down the laws of
geometry the rules of geometry and wow
how amazing they were how successful
they were
at enabling people to do things that
they hadn't been able to do before
make predictions and derive knowledge
and it was pristine and beautiful and it
seemed to be certain you could prove
things
using Euclid elements using that first
the these early attempts at mathematics
now science comes along and it can't
quite prove stuff
that's got explanations
but there's a problem for the
philosophers how can we know
that what is claimed in science is
certainly true over there in mathematics
you've got c squared equals a squared
plus b squared Pythagoras is theorem
it's certainly true we've got many many
proofs that this thing is absolutely
certainly true can't deny it
start with your axioms and and get to
this theorem
so what do we do in science you know
well you know people say well
maybe it works via not deduction as that
is you know can deduce that c squared
equals a squared plus b squared given
some axioms of the geometry
maybe we can't quite do that deduction
we've got the next best thing induction
assume that the thing just continues
you see all these white swans
you've seen sapphires white so you
presume
all the swans you will see in the future
will be wines
that the sun has risen every single day
of your life sometimes it's hidden by
clouds but you presume that you're going
to see the sunrise again tomorrow and
every other day in can't be sure can't
prove it but hey better than nothing
well what's wrong with this well
you're not getting explanatory theories
is the first thing to say via that route
nothing about claiming that every single
Swan is white tells you anything about
the explanation of birds that's not an
explanation all you're doing is saying
what color swans are that's not science
how is that science
they got run a peer-reviewed Journal
paper on that
the the sun rising every day in the past
is not a cosmological theory it doesn't
tell you about the motion of planets
doesn't say why you don't get why
from just repeatedly observing Sun
what you do what you have actually what
actually happened
was people looked in the sky and noticed
that all the stars at night moved in the
same way except for these wandering
Stars
planetos okay Greek word that led us to
the word Planet which meant the things
that wandered across the sky they didn't
fit with the regular pattern that was a
problem a problem that required a
solution the solution
was an explanation
and the first
thing was not repeatedly observing that
it was
Ptolemy writing down well maybe the
Earth's at the center we've got this
geocentric View and then we're going to
have these things called epicycles
and the Sun goes around the earth and
then
planets go around the earth as well but
then they they Orbit on their orbits and
this is called so you can look this up
so this Grand explanation
doesn't have anything to do with
deriving that theory from looking at the
planets he didn't get the epicycles by
looking it came from here
onto the paper he wrote down and Drew
pictures
that was wrong
refuted eventually conclusively by
Galileo Galileo who pointed a telescope
at two places importantly one Venus
where he could see that Venus had phases
that couldn't be explained by The
ptolemaic View could only be explained
could only be explained if the sun was
the center of the solar system and Venus
went around the Sun closer than what the
Earth did
that would explain the phases of Venus
and
not everything went around the earth
because he pointed his telescope in the
other direction out to Jupiter and saw
that there were Galilean moons there
were four moons that he could see going
around Jupiter so not everything went
around so he had the explanation of
heliocentrism the idea the sun was at
the center now there were Copernicus was
there before him but he had the crucial
test the experiment
by observing
these celestial objects and
distinguishing between these two
theories The ptolemag View versus the
the heliocentric view the geocentric
versus the heliocentric
no point in that story that I just gave
you are you
generalizing from observations it comes
from his mind
just conjectures there's no repeated
observations here it just never happens
Einstein was interested in problems to
do with electrodynamics
also having to solve problems about the
the the way in which mercury didn't
quite
you know fit its orbit
as it went around the Sun as predicted
by Newton comes up with general
relativity again not observing things
over and over again the idea of
induction
is that
you need to have some justification for
this set of observations going on off
into the infinite future extrapolating
but you can only extrapolate us saying
this on Twitter today
you can only extrapolate if you already
have a theory if you see something like
the sun has risen every day in the past
then you need a theory you're
extrapolating and saying it will rise
again tomorrow
can only legitimately be made
legitimately be made if you already have
a theory about why it should
otherwise
there's no reason to think that it
should you're just saying that you know
the past resembles the future but the
past doesn't always resemble the future
at all
if every day in the past
for the last five years
you have measured the temperature of
water
from room temperature up to 80 degrees
Celsius you will find a perfect straight
line if you've got a constant heat
Source this is you know my my
article on induction talks about this
Brett Hall induction Google it you find
this
it's a standard experiment anyone can do
you put a pot of water on the stove turn
the stove on
put a thermometer in
have a stopwatch plot
the time and the temperature every
minute and you'll see it goes up
steadily beautiful straight line
beautiful straight line stop the
stopwatch
at
stop the stop the stopwatch when you get
to 80 degrees Celsius just stop it there
you'll have this beautiful straight line
lovely straight line you can do that for
years every day repeating the same
experiment noticing that you're always
getting the straight line thing so
that's the past the past set of
observations
should you do that experiment again
tomorrow you get the same thing what if
you decide to boil the water what
happens
I do this with students you get them to
extrapolate you get them to do it to 80
degrees 90 degrees so now okay turn the
heat off turn your Bunsen burner off now
let's guess what happens guess what
happens they all draw a straight line
they all draw it let's connect the dots
now extrapolate
they don't know about what's called
latent heat they don't know that once
you get to 100 degrees Celsius
you get a plateau
that the water boils at 100 degrees
Celsius the temperature does not
continue to increase
all induction is like that mistake of
extrapolation
if you think that you can extrapolate
that line
you must have a theory
first
to legitimately extrapolate otherwise
you've got no reason there's no reason
to prefer that straight line to anything
else in particular because in the case
of water
or any other substance it plateaus
so you weren't there was no legitimate
reason for extrapolating a straight line
so why should you think in any other
situation you're entitled to extrapolate
without first having a theory if you
came along and you said like if someone
said to me I've got this substance here
unknown it's a liquid
if we heat the thing
okay over time I want you to predict
what the shape of the heating curve will
be like I would draw something similar
to water I wouldn't know exactly when
it's going to boil but I would tell you
that well I have a theory I have an
explanation from chemistry that all
liquids eventually turn to gases if you
give them enough energy because they're
made of particles and the particles are
bonded together quite strongly when
they're a liquid but eventually if you
give them enough energy they'll achieve
effectively escape velocity and turn
into a gas and at that point at that
moment of boiling what happens is the
temperature Planters the temperature
Remains the Same at the boiling point at
the boiling temperature
that comes from a good explanation
series
telling me
um that that's the explanation
so all induction is
is a was a desperate attempt by people
who didn't understand knowledge
to justify
scientific knowledge but they didn't
need to as popper explained you didn't
need this there is no problem of
induction there is no
there is no requirement to fix induction
to figure out how it is that we justify
claims in science as true instead we
have explanations of stuff or we don't
and when we do that's the explanation
there are no competitors and if there is
a competitor in science then we do a
crucial test and experiment
to rule out
one of them by cleverly designing the
experiment that will go one way
if this theory is
correct and another way if this theory
is correct
or better to say if this theory is wrong
it will go one way if this theory is
wrong it will go the other way
correct is ambiguous there by correct I
mean best explanation for now of course
excuse me
Dale Belinda has suggested
um for an excellent granting and
economics read Human Action by Ludwig
von mises yes I've read your great
fantastic year
um
economics is just one of those areas you
know I'm I'm interested in it to a
limited extent it's like morality it's
just one of those things where
people have grand theories of morality
it's like are you a utilitarian are you
into virtue ethics whatever
it's just one of those
areas where you know I'm libertarian
with morality it's like
just
if if people aren't being hurt
by you and your actions then they need
be left alone the same is true in
economics if this
if this transaction is not affecting you
leave it alone leave them alone leave
those people involved in that
transaction line so I think that
economics is kind of um
now leave it to the people who are
interested in it but I think the more
pressing issue when it comes to
economics is to try and get the
government out of the economy as much as
possible at the moment
not only in
the
places like China where you have severe
government control economy
the Western world is plagued by
government interventions into the
economy
and and it shouldn't be that way
um so that's my that's my Essential
interest when it comes to the economy is
uh how to fix uh yeah the problems
inherent in it
with vis-a-vis government involvement
um
a deal what is the difference between a
research program and a theory is your
natural selection what implications that
have for testability falsifiability okay
so a research program is a broader
category of things in a scientific
theory
the
this is why you know people talk about
evolution by natural selection as being
a research program
um it's a claim about how
the diversity of organisms arose or what
we would say these days is how
biological knowledge arises
there's no observation that you could
make that would refute it
you can't find an organism that would
refute Evolution whatever selection so
people say oh it's untestable
said well if you found
um was it him someone who said well if
you found rabbits in the Precambrian
this would refute evolution by natural
selection in other words the Precambrian
was a time when you didn't have complex
organisms it's in the fossil record if
you found rabbits in that strata
then that would refuse Evolution when
after selection but it wouldn't
it would just mean you've got a problem
and the problem might be solved by
well rabbits just evolved much earlier
than you thought or more than likely
you've made an error with your rock
strata okay so rabbits in the
Precambrian do not refuse evolution by
natural selection no observation
seemingly would
unless I think David says this unless
you had just
repeated
highly unlikely coincidences where
favorable mutations are only ever
occurring
that would cry out for an explanation
if they were only favorable mutations
you know mutations are normally bad
if you had an organism where it was just
constantly good
constantly getting better rapidly
getting better
mutations that happened don't cause
cancer don't cause any problem they're
always in the direction of well now the
organism has
legs now it has wheels now it has wings
now it has rocket engines there's
Evolution went after selection then
you've got a problem then then you might
have refuted evolution by natural
selection there's something else going
on there but that's not the situation
we're in
so we call this a research program
because there is no such experiment that
you can do instead there are theories
within biology
but the framework is evolution when a
solution research program Constructor
Theory might be kind of like that as
well
um so you
but
not all good ideas as I was saying
earlier need to be testable or
falsifiable in the experimental sense
series of Economics theories of morality
theories of even certain
you know sociological psychological
theories don't need to necessarily be
testable falsifiable
um it's it's specifically within science
that you need to have testability okay
but you know if you claim to me
that you prefer chocolate over
strawberry that's a psychological theory
that you have I don't need to be able to
test that I don't have any way of
testing that demand it's not testable
from my perspective third person
um so yeah but it can still be a a
valuable
claim okay you can say chocolate over
strawberry and so we know what dessert
to get you for example so it can be a
legitimate claim
um
okay
well it's been an hour and a half which
I think is probably more than enough
um
I've recently put out it from qubit in
two parts that's well worth watching I
think such a great paper by David
Deutsch much less well-known than his
other things this is the idea coming
from it from bit which was Wheeler's
idea the great John Wheeler
who when you read through his paper
which is not called it for a bit it's
called something else but it puts
forward that thesis
saying that
physical stuff somehow comes from
computation
that
the sense all is information in a way
and he has this argument about well you
know
the surface of a black hole would
contain
only the information that has you know
been lost in it
Etc
the difficulty here is that
physical stuff
can always be understood
at a deeper level
and so even if you think you've gotten
down to these bits of information you
can ask why
the world has the form that it does
and David's point is and his great
advance in it from qubit was to say even
if you were to assert that physical
reality is made of information guess
what the fundamental unit of information
is the qubit
and the qubit is physical
so we'll return to physical reality as
physical
which seems like a vacuous claim but
it's not when you've got idealists in
the world you've got idealists in the
world people who say you know we're all
in a simulation or it's all ideas we're
all imagining it the latest
instantiation of this is Donald Hoffman
is getting a bit of a run at the moment
that we think reality into existence in
some way and that external reality
doesn't have an objective existence but
he fails to Grapple with what ideas are
anyway
that ideas
are
a form of information at least
information processing an information
processing comes down to
fundamentally
the action of cute can be reduced to
what qubits can and can't do
and cubits are physical that they have
to be a physical particle some sort of
okay so yeah I would urge anyone
watching this to watch that especially
if you're a fan of David Deutsche it
gives you a good insight into where he's
coming from in terms of physics
epistemology and computation
but for now I think that will do me for
the live stream
um
yes feel free to
um go to my channel broader Channel on
YouTube and to of course the podcast
topcast itself uh and do become a
patreon if you feel so inclined that's a
Brett
hall.org or links to there until next
time bye-bye
foreign